Undergraduate Numerical Techniques for Atmosphere, Ocean and Earth Scientists: ATSC 409
=======================================================================================

PDF copy
--------

`Grad and Ugrad syllabi and schedule <pdf_files/numeric.pdf>`_

Calendar Entry
--------------

Web-based introduction to the practical numerical solution of ordinary
and partial differential equations including considerations of stability
and accuracy. Credit will not be granted for both ATSC 409 and ATSC
506/EOSC 511.

Course Purpose
--------------

The students completing this course will be able to apply standard
numerical solution techniques to the solution of problems such as waves,
advection, population growth.

Instructors
-----------

| Phil Austin, 2-2175, paustin@eos.ubc.ca, Rm 157 EOS South
| Susan Allen, 2-2828, sallen@eos.ubc.ca, Rm 3017 ESB

Prerequisites
-------------

Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations (MATH 215 or equivalent) AND
a programming course. Partial Differential Equations (Math 316 or Phys
312) is recommended. [1]_

Course Structure
----------------

This course is not lecture based. The course is an interactive, computer
based laboratory course. The computer will lead you through the
laboratory (like a set of lab notes) and you will answer problems most
of which use the computer. The course consists of three parts. A set of
interactive, computer based laboratory exercises, two mini-projects and
a final project.

During the meeting times, we will hold short quizzes (just to make sure
you are keeping up) and brief presentations to help with technical
matters and the more difficult sections of the course.

You can use a web-browser to examine the course exercises. Point your
browser to:

http://clouds.eos.ubc.ca/~phil/numeric

Grades
------

-  Laboratory Exercises 30%

-  Quizzes 10%

-  Mini-projects 20%

-  Project Proposal 5%

-  Project 30%

-  Project Oral Presentation 5%

Meeting Times
-------------

1400-1600 Thursdays, Room 203, Earth and Oceans Sciences (EOS) Main

Laboratory Problem Sets
-----------------------

The laboratory problem sets can be given to either instructor when
completed. (We have mail boxes in the Earth and Ocean Sciences Main
Office). They may be hand written or typed. You may wish or be asked to
include plots and diagrams. You can email us plots instead of printing
them. Sometimes, rather than a large series of plots, you may wish to
include a summarizing table. If you do not understand the scope of a
problem, please ask. The time scales given in the Contents section are
based on 7 hours/week additional to class time. Help with the labs is
available 1) through a mailing list so you can contact your classmates
and ask them 2) during the weekly scheduled lab or 3) directly from the
instructors. Assignments, mini-projects and the project are expected on
time. Late ones will be marked and then the mark will be multiplied by
:math:`(0.9)^{\rm (number\ of\ days\ or\ part\ days\ late)}`. (Below we
give two dates for each assignment. You should aim for the first one
(this would keep you totally up to date). The later one allows a couple
of days in case. )

Contents
--------

Each laboratory is separated into sessions of about 2 hours. You may do
the sessions any time during the week. You will need to complete three
sessions a week to keep up with the course material covered in the
quizzes.

-  Introductory Meeting

-  Laboratory One

   -  Four sessions: 1) section 3, 2) section 4, 3) section 5, 4)
      section 6.

   -  Quiz #1 Objectives [2]_ pertaining to Lab 1 sections 3-5

   -  Quiz #2 Objectives pertaining to Lab 1 and Lab 2 sections 3-4.

   -  Assignment: See web.

-  Laboratory Two

   -  Three sessions: 1) section 3-4.1.1, 2) section 4.1.2-end 4, 3)
      sections 5-7

   -  Quiz #2 Objectives pertaining to Lab 1 and Lab 2 sections 3-4.

   -  Quiz #3 Objectives pertaining to Lab 2 and Lab 3 section 2.

   -  Assignment: See web.

-  Laboratory Three

   -  Four sessions: 1) section 2- begin 2.4.1, 2) section 2.4.1-end 2,
      3) section 3-4, 4) section 5

   -  Quiz #3 Objectives pertaining to Lab 2 and Lab 3 section 2.

   -  Quiz #4 Objectives pertaining to Lab 3.

   -  Assignment: See web.

-  Mini-Project #1

   -  Two sessions

   -  Details on web.

-  Laboratory Four

   -  Four sessions: 1) section 3, 2) section 4.1-4.2, 3) section 4.3-5,
      4) finish problem set

   -  Quiz #5 Objectives pertaining to Lab 4 sections 3-4.2

   -  Quiz #6 Objectives pertaining to Lab 4 and Lab 5 section 3

   -  Assignment: See web.

-  Laboratory Five

   -  Three sessions: 1) section 3, 2) section 4, 3) section 5

   -  Quiz #6 Objectives pertaining to Lab 4 and Lab 5 section 3

   -  Quiz #7 Objectives pertaining to Lab 5

   -  Assignment: 4a, 4b, 6-1, 6-2, 6-3

-  Mini-Project #2

   -  Two sessions

   -  Details on web.

-  Laboratory Seven (do 7 if you have PDE’s)

   -  Four sessions: 1) section 3-4.3, 2) section 4.4-4.5, 3) section 5,
      4) section 6

   -  Quiz #8 Objectives pertaining to Lab 7 section 3-4.3

   -  Assignment: See web.

-  Laboratory Six (do 6 if you do not have PDE’s)

   -  Four sessions: 1) section 3 2) section 4-4.2 3) section 4.3-4.4,
      4) section 5-6

   -  Quiz #8 Objections pertaining to Lab 6 section 3

-  Assignment: See web.

-  Project

   -  Eight Sessions

   -  20 minute presentation to the class

   -  Project report

.. [1]
   If you have PDE’s Lab 7 is strongly recommended, whereas if you do
   not have PDE’s do Lab 6

.. [2]
   Objectives is an older term for Learning Goals
